rep-0134.rst, before:

REP: 134
Title: catkin_make_isolated for non-standard catkin packages
Author: William Woodall, Dirk Thomas, Thibault Kruse
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 15-Dec-2012
Post-History:


Abstract
========

This REP describes the new command `catkin_make_isolated` to be
delivered with catkin [1]_, to allow isolated builds of packages and
in that process also build of plain cmake projects.

Specification
=============

The REP introduces a new syntax element to use in the exports section
of the package.xml::

  <build_type>catkin(default)|cmake</build_type>

Catkin will use the value of this tag to determine how to treat a
package.  Currently only two values are defined, "catkin" and "cmake",
but further build types may be added later (possible examples could be
make, autotools, rosbuild). "catkin" is the default value for this
property that will be assumed in the absence of the tag.

Having a package with a different build_type than "catkin" in the
catkin workspace will make the default catkin build fail. Instead, the
user will have to invoke a new command `catkin_build_isolated`, which
performs the build of all workspace projects in a different way catkin
usually does. Each catkin package will be build using an isolated make
invocation. This is necessary as non-standard catkin packages do not
act compliantly within the configuration process (they do not generate
catkin-compliant configuration files during configuration so that
other packages could depend on them after configuration).

`catkin_make_isolated` uses the information form all catkin package
manifests in the workspace to build a valid ordering of build steps.
Then for each package, a build folder is created that relies on the
devel spaces of preceding packages in dependency
ordering. `catkin_make_isolated` invokes cmake then make. later
invocations just invoke make.

Any other build system than catkin to be supported has to satisfy the
following constraints:

 * building packages with the build system must produce in the devel
   space artifacts equivalent to an installation of the package
 * installing packages installs to the CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX

Additionally, build systems should strive to support the following:

 * Script files should not be duplicated in the devel space, but relay
   files be used that point to the source files
 * The source file tree should not be changed by build invocations,
   the build space should be used for build artifacts that
   belong into the develspace.

catkin_make_isolated options
----------------------------

`catkin_make_isolated` shares some of the command-line options with
`catkin_make` but not all.

  --build BUILD, --build-space BUILD
                        The path to the parent build space (default "build_isolated")
  --devel DEVEL, --devel-space DEVEL
                        Sets the target parent devel space (default "devel_isolated")
  --merge               Build each catkin package into a common devel space.
  --install-space INSTALL_SPACE
                        Sets the target install space (default
                        "install_isolated")
  --install             Causes each catkin package to be installed.

By default `catkin_make_isolated` will create a build folder for package foo at::

  workspace/<buildspace_isolated>/foo/

whereas catkin_make only creates one buildspace for all packages at:

  workspace/<buildspace>

The isolated buildspace of a package can be used to (re-)build the
package using the make command, provided the prerequisite packages are
in the CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH.

By default `catkin_make_isolated` will
create a build folder for package foo at::

  workspace/<develspace_isolated>/foo/

whereas catkin_make only creates one develspace for all packages at:

  workspace/<buildspace>

the `--merge` option allows to use a single develspace for all
packages, while the buildspaces remain isolated. If not used, the parentfolder::

  workspace/<develspace_isolated>

will still contain setup.*sh files to use to create a runtime environment.

Passing `--install` will invoke `make install` in for normal catkin
packages in each isolated buildspace, and in non-standard packages, the
behavior will be defined by each alternative build system support.

CMake build system
------------------

The initial support for non-standard catkin packages using the plain cmake
build system is implemented by invoking make in the isolated
buildspace of a package. After that the cmake project is installed to
the develspace to comply with the develspace concept.


Motivation
==========

Catkin defines a catkin package to be a folder containing a
package.xml file satisfying the catkin syntax and a CMakeList.txt.

Catkin provides cmake macros and variables, in particular the
`catkin_package()` macro, which performs necessary steps for a catkin
package to be build successfully in the catkin build process.  This
relates to the configure process of a package also generating suitable
configuration files for dependent packages, as well as placing
suitable build artifacts in the so called devel space.

However it is technically feasible to create a catkin package that
does not use the provided catkin cmake macros or variables. The
CMakeLists.txt then defines a build process according to e.g. plain
cmake rules. Such a project which is not compliant with catkin breaks
the default catkin build process (mainly due to the lack of
catkin-generated cmake configuration file, and due to the absence of
valid devel space files).

Several libraries in the ROS ecosystem have a complex CMakeLists.txt
setup, and some maintainers may be reluctant to maintain a
catkin-compliant CMakeLists.txt.

This introduces the notion of a non-standard catkin package. Such a package
has a package.xml file, but does not follow any convention about the
CMakeLists.txt. This REP defines basic support for an alternative
build process that can also include such non-standard catkin packages. This
measure is a workaround and not currently intended for the majority of
catkin users. Current caveats are very low speed, and a confusing
folder layout. The develspace may also contain duplicated folders from
the source space. The target audience are users who want to build
core ros packages from source, rather than using pre-packaged
distributions.

The first packages to be included as non-standard catkin packages like this
are libraries like flann, kdl, opencv, pcl.

Rationale
=========

The build process catkin establishes bulk-processes all catkin
projects within the same workspace folder as if they were part of a
single cmake project. This design was chosen to speed up the
configuration and build processes, and to allow for a single build
space to allow easy cross-compilation. Rules exist for developers to
follow to reduce the risk of undesired cmake namespace collisions
between catkin packages (Some namespace collisions are desired to
detect conflicts early that have to be resolved anyway).

Catkin also defines a devel space which acts like an install space in
many respects. By complying to catkin rules for CMakeLists.txt,
developers ensure that a catkin package can be deployed to a devel
space properly. The devel space artifacts are generated by invoking
the "make" command, with the default target (no 'install' necessary).

A non-standard catkin package does not use catkin macros (in
particular not catkin_package, which is essential to the catkin
workspace), so during it's configuration process it does not generate
files for dependent packages to depend on it. This breaks the
bulk-processing approach of the default catkin build process.

Instead, non-standard catkin projects can be supported by dropping the bulk
processing approach for an isolated build approach. This configures
and builds each package before configuring and building dependent
packages.

Reference Implementation
========================

A catkin_make_isolated command has been released with ROS Groovy.

References
==========

.. [1] Catkin build system documentation
   (http://ros.org/wiki/catkin)

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:

Commit message:

considered alternative --option to catkin_make

rep-0134.rst, after:

REP: 134
Title: catkin_make_isolated for non-standard catkin packages
Author: William Woodall, Dirk Thomas, Thibault Kruse
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 15-Dec-2012
Post-History:


Abstract
========

This REP describes the new command `catkin_make_isolated` to be
delivered with catkin [1]_, to allow isolated builds of packages and
in that process also build of plain cmake projects.

Specification
=============

The REP introduces a new syntax element to use in the exports section
of the package.xml::

  <build_type>catkin(default)|cmake</build_type>

Catkin will use the value of this tag to determine how to treat a
package.  Currently only two values are defined, "catkin" and "cmake",
but further build types may be added later (possible examples could be
make, autotools, rosbuild). "catkin" is the default value for this
property that will be assumed in the absence of the tag.

Having a package with a different build_type than "catkin" in the
catkin workspace will make the default catkin build fail. Instead, the
user will have to invoke a new command `catkin_build_isolated`, which
performs the build of all workspace projects in a different way catkin
usually does. Each catkin package will be build using an isolated make
invocation. This is necessary as non-standard catkin packages do not
act compliantly within the configuration process (they do not generate
catkin-compliant configuration files during configuration so that
other packages could depend on them after configuration).

`catkin_make_isolated` uses the information form all catkin package
manifests in the workspace to build a valid ordering of build steps.
Then for each package, a build folder is created that relies on the
devel spaces of preceding packages in dependency
ordering. `catkin_make_isolated` invokes cmake then make. later
invocations just invoke make.

Any other build system than catkin to be supported has to satisfy the
following constraints:

 * building packages with the build system must produce in the devel
   space artifacts equivalent to an installation of the package
 * installing packages installs to the CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX

Additionally, build systems should strive to support the following:

 * Script files should not be duplicated in the devel space, but relay
   files be used that point to the source files
 * The source file tree should not be changed by build invocations,
   the build space should be used for build artifacts that
   belong into the develspace.

catkin_make_isolated options
----------------------------

`catkin_make_isolated` shares some of the command-line options with
`catkin_make` but not all.

  --build BUILD, --build-space BUILD
                        The path to the parent build space (default "build_isolated")
  --devel DEVEL, --devel-space DEVEL
                        Sets the target parent devel space (default "devel_isolated")
  --merge               Build each catkin package into a common devel space.
  --install-space INSTALL_SPACE
                        Sets the target install space (default
                        "install_isolated")
  --install             Causes each catkin package to be installed.

By default `catkin_make_isolated` will create a build folder for package foo at::

  workspace/<buildspace_isolated>/foo/

whereas catkin_make only creates one buildspace for all packages at:

  workspace/<buildspace>

The isolated buildspace of a package can be used to (re-)build the
package using the make command, provided the prerequisite packages are
in the CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH.

By default `catkin_make_isolated` will
create a build folder for package foo at::

  workspace/<develspace_isolated>/foo/

whereas catkin_make only creates one develspace for all packages at:

  workspace/<buildspace>

the `--merge` option allows to use a single develspace for all
packages, while the buildspaces remain isolated. If not used, the parentfolder::

  workspace/<develspace_isolated>

will still contain setup.*sh files to use to create a runtime environment.

Passing `--install` will invoke `make install` in for normal catkin
packages in each isolated buildspace, and in non-standard packages, the
behavior will be defined by each alternative build system support.

CMake build system
------------------

The initial support for non-standard catkin packages using the plain cmake
build system is implemented by invoking make in the isolated
buildspace of a package. After that the cmake project is installed to
the develspace to comply with the develspace concept.


Motivation
==========

Catkin defines a catkin package to be a folder containing a
package.xml file satisfying the catkin syntax and a CMakeList.txt.

Catkin provides cmake macros and variables, in particular the
`catkin_package()` macro, which performs necessary steps for a catkin
package to be build successfully in the catkin build process.  This
relates to the configure process of a package also generating suitable
configuration files for dependent packages, as well as placing
suitable build artifacts in the so called devel space.

However it is technically feasible to create a catkin package that
does not use the provided catkin cmake macros or variables. The
CMakeLists.txt then defines a build process according to e.g. plain
cmake rules. Such a project which is not compliant with catkin breaks
the default catkin build process (mainly due to the lack of
catkin-generated cmake configuration file, and due to the absence of
valid devel space files).

Several libraries in the ROS ecosystem have a complex CMakeLists.txt
setup, and some maintainers may be reluctant to maintain a
catkin-compliant CMakeLists.txt.

This introduces the notion of a non-standard catkin package. Such a package
has a package.xml file, but does not follow any convention about the
CMakeLists.txt. This REP defines basic support for an alternative
build process that can also include such non-standard catkin packages. This
measure is a workaround and not currently intended for the majority of
catkin users. Current caveats are very low speed, and a confusing
folder layout. The develspace may also contain duplicated folders from
the source space. The target audience are users who want to build
core ros packages from source, rather than using pre-packaged
distributions.

The first packages to be included as non-standard catkin packages like this
are libraries like flann, kdl, opencv, pcl.

Rationale
=========

The build process catkin establishes bulk-processes all catkin
projects within the same workspace folder as if they were part of a
single cmake project. This design was chosen to speed up the
configuration and build processes, and to allow for a single build
space to allow easy cross-compilation. Rules exist for developers to
follow to reduce the risk of undesired cmake namespace collisions
between catkin packages (Some namespace collisions are desired to
detect conflicts early that have to be resolved anyway).

Catkin also defines a devel space which acts like an install space in
many respects. By complying to catkin rules for CMakeLists.txt,
developers ensure that a catkin package can be deployed to a devel
space properly. The devel space artifacts are generated by invoking
the "make" command, with the default target (no 'install' necessary).

A non-standard catkin package does not use catkin macros (in
particular not catkin_package, which is essential to the catkin
workspace), so during it's configuration process it does not generate
files for dependent packages to depend on it. This breaks the
bulk-processing approach of the default catkin build process.

Instead, non-standard catkin projects can be supported by dropping the bulk
processing approach for an isolated build approach. This configures
and builds each package before configuring and building dependent
packages.

Alternatives
============

This section reasons about alternative design choices and why they
were rejected.

catkin_make command option
--------------------------

An option would have been to extend catkin_make with an option like
--isolated. However the commandline syntax between catkin_make and
catkin_make_isolated varies somewhat, as well as the build result.
However, currently discussed future changes to catkin_make might
change this (consider `catkin_cmake` command).


Reference Implementation
========================

A catkin_make_isolated command has been released with ROS Groovy.

References
==========

.. [1] Catkin build system documentation
   (http://ros.org/wiki/catkin)

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
